README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/deltaforge-blc.png" width="150" alt="DeltaForge">
</p>
<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/vnvo/deltaforge/actions/workflows/ci.yml">
    <img src="https://github.com/vnvo/deltaforge/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg" alt="CI">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/vnvo/deltaforge/releases">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/vnvo/deltaforge" alt="Release">
  </a>
  <a href="https://vnvo.github.io/deltaforge">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-online-blue.svg" alt="Docs">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/vnvo/deltaforge/pkgs/container/deltaforge">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/ghcr.io-deltaforge-blue?logo=docker" alt="GHCR">
  </a>
  <a href="https://hub.docker.com/r/vnvohub/deltaforge">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/vnvohub/deltaforge?logo=docker" alt="Docker Pulls">
  </a>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/arch-amd64%20%7C%20arm64-green" alt="Arch">
  <a href="https://coveralls.io/github/vnvo/deltaforge?branch=main">
    <img src="https://coveralls.io/repos/github/vnvo/deltaforge/badge.svg?branch=main" alt="Coverage Status">
  </a>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/rustc-1.89+-orange.svg" alt="MSRV">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT%20OR%20Apache--2.0-blue.svg" alt="License">
</p>

> A modular, efficient and config-driven Change Data Capture (CDC) micro-framework.

> ⚠️ **Status:** Active development. APIs, configuration, and semantics may change.

DeltaForge is a lightweight framework for building CDC pipelines that stream database changes into downstream systems such as Kafka, Redis, and NATS. It focuses on:

- **User Control** : Using an embedded JS engine, users can fully control what happens to each event.
- **Config-driven pipelines** : YAML-defined pipelines instead of bespoke code per use-case.
- **Cloud-Native** : CN first design and operation.
- **Extensibility** : add your own sources, processors, and sinks.

However, DeltaForge is NOT a DAG based stream processor.
DeltaForge is meant to replace tools like Debezium and similar.

## Quick Start

Get DeltaForge running in under 5 minutes:

<table>
<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="top">

### Minimal Pipeline Config
```yaml
# pipeline.yaml
apiVersion: deltaforge/v1
kind: Pipeline
metadata:
  name: my-first-pipeline
  tenant: demo

spec:
  source:
    type: mysql
    config:
      id: mysql-src
      dsn: ${MYSQL_DSN}
      tables: [mydb.users]

  processors: []

  sinks:
    - type: kafka
      config:
        id: kafka-sink
        brokers: ${KAFKA_BROKERS}
        topic: users.cdc
```

</td>
<td width="50%" valign="top">

### Run it with Docker
```bash
docker run --rm \
  -e MYSQL_DSN="mysql://user:pass@host:3306/mydb" \
  -e KAFKA_BROKERS="kafka:9092" \
  -v $(pwd)/pipeline.yaml:/etc/deltaforge/pipeline.yaml:ro \
  ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest \
  --config /etc/deltaforge/pipeline.yaml
```

That's it! DeltaForge streams changes from `mydb.users` to Kafka.

**Want Debezium-compatible output?**
```yaml
sinks:
  - type: kafka
    config:
      id: kafka-sink
      brokers: ${KAFKA_BROKERS}
      topic: users.cdc
      envelope:
        type: debezium
```

Output: `{"schema":null,"payload":{...}}`

📘 [Full docs](https://vnvo.github.io/deltaforge) · [Configuration reference](#configuration-schema)

</td>
</tr>
</table>

## The Tech

<table>
  <tr>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Built with</b></td>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Sources</b></td>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Processors</b></td>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Sinks</b></td>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Output Formats</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/rust/rust-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="Rust">
      <br><sub>Rust</sub>
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/mysql/mysql-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="MySQL">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/postgresql/postgresql-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="PostgreSQL">
      <br><sub>MySQL · PostgreSQL</sub>
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/javascript/javascript-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="JavaScript">
      <br><sub>JavaScript</sub>
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/apachekafka/apachekafka-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="Kafka">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/redis/redis-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="Redis">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/nats/nats-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="NATS">
      <br><sub>Kafka · Redis · NATS</sub>
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Native-red?style=flat-square" alt="Native">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Debezium-green?style=flat-square" alt="Debezium">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/CloudEvents-blue?style=flat-square" alt="CloudEvents">
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Features

- **Sources**
  - MySQL binlog CDC with GTID support
  - PostgreSQL logical replication via pgoutput
  - Turso/libSQL CDC (experimental, behind `turso` feature flag)

- **Schema Registry**
  - Source-owned schema types (source native semantics)
  - Schema change detection and versioning
  - SHA-256 fingerprinting for stable change detection

- **Schema Sensing**
  - Automatic schema inference from JSON event payloads
  - Deep inspection for nested JSON structures
  - High-cardinality key detection (session IDs, trace IDs, dynamic maps)
  - Configurable sampling with warmup and cache optimization
  - Drift detection comparing DB schema vs observed data
  - JSON Schema export for downstream consumers

- **Checkpoints**
  - Pluggable backends (File, SQLite with versioning, in-memory)
  - Configurable commit policies (all, required, quorum)
  - Transaction boundary preservation (best effort)

- **Processors**
  - JavaScript processors using `deno_core`:
    - Run user defined functions (UDFs) in JS to transform batches of events

- **Sinks**
  - Kafka producer sink (via `rdkafka`)
  - Redis stream sink
  - NATS JetStream sink (via `async_nats`)
  - Configurable envelope formats: Native, Debezium, CloudEvents
  - JSON wire encoding (Avro planned and more to come)

### Event Output Formats

DeltaForge supports multiple envelope formats for ecosystem compatibility:

| Format | Output | Use Case |
|--------|--------|----------|
| `native` | `{"op":"c","after":{...},"source":{...}}` | Lowest overhead, DeltaForge consumers |
| `debezium` | `{"schema":null,"payload":{...}}` | Drop-in Debezium replacement |
| `cloudevents` | `{"specversion":"1.0","type":"...","data":{...}}` | CNCF-standard, event-driven systems |

🔄 **Debezium Compatibility**: DeltaForge uses Debezium's **schemaless mode** (`schema: null`), which matches Debezium's `JsonConverter` with `schemas.enable=false` - the recommended configuration for most Kafka deployments. This provides wire compatibility with existing Debezium consumers without the overhead of inline schemas (~500+ bytes per message).

> 💡 **Migrating from Debezium?** If your consumers already use `schemas.enable=false`, configure `envelope: { type: debezium }` on your sinks for drop-in compatibility. For consumers expecting inline schemas, you'll need Schema Registry integration (Avro encoding - planned).

See [Envelope Formats](docs/src/envelopes.md) for detailed examples and wire format specifications.

## Documentation

- 📘 Online docs: <https://vnvo.github.io/deltaforge>
- 🛠 Local: `mdbook serve docs` (browse at <http://localhost:3000>)

## Local development helper

Use the bundled `dev.sh` CLI to spin up the dependency stack and run common workflows consistently:

```bash
./dev.sh up     # start Postgres, MySQL, Kafka, Redis, NATS from docker-compose.dev.yml
./dev.sh ps     # view container status
./dev.sh check  # fmt --check + clippy + tests (matches CI)
```

See the [Development guide](docs/src/development.md) for the full layout and additional info.

## Container image

Pre-built multi-arch images (amd64/arm64) are available:
```bash
# From GitHub Container Registry
docker pull ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest

# From Docker Hub
docker pull vnvohub/deltaforge:latest

# Debug variant (includes shell)
docker pull ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest-debug
```

Or build locally:
```bash
docker build -t deltaforge:local .
```

Run it by mounting your pipeline specs (environment variables are expanded inside the YAML) and exposing the API and metrics ports:

```bash
docker run --rm \
  -p 8080:8080 -p 9000:9000 \
  -v $(pwd)/examples/dev.yaml:/etc/deltaforge/pipelines.yaml:ro \
  -v deltaforge-checkpoints:/app/data \
  deltaforge:local \
  --config /etc/deltaforge/pipelines.yaml
```

or with env variables to be expanded inside the provided config:
```bash
# pull the container
docker pull ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest

# run it
docker run --rm \
  -p 8080:8080 -p 9000:9000 \
  -e MYSQL_DSN="mysql://user:pass@host:3306/db" \
  -e KAFKA_BROKERS="kafka:9092" \
  -v $(pwd)/pipeline.yaml:/etc/deltaforge/pipeline.yaml:ro \
  -v deltaforge-checkpoints:/app/data \
  ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest \
  --config /etc/deltaforge/pipeline.yaml
```

The container runs as a non-root user, writes checkpoints to `/app/data/df_checkpoints.json`, and listens on `0.0.0.0:8080` for the control plane API with metrics served on `:9000`.


## Architecture Highlights

### At-least-once and Checkpoint Timing Guarantees

DeltaForge guarantees at-least-once delivery through careful checkpoint ordering:

```
Source → Processor → Sink (deliver) → Checkpoint (save)
                           │
                    Sink acknowledges
                    successful delivery
                           │
                    THEN checkpoint saved
```

Checkpoints are never saved before events are delivered. A crash between delivery and checkpoint causes replay (duplicates possible), but never loss.

### Schema-Checkpoint Correlation

The schema registry tracks schema versions with sequence numbers and optional checkpoint correlation. During replay, events are interpreted with the schema that was active when they were produced - even if the table structure has since changed.

### Source-Owned Schemas

Unlike tools that normalize all databases to a universal type system, DeltaForge lets each source define its own schema semantics. MySQL schemas capture MySQL types (`bigint(20) unsigned`, `json`), PostgreSQL schemas preserve arrays and custom types. No lossy normalization, no universal type maintenance burden.


## API

The REST API exposes JSON endpoints for liveness, readiness, and pipeline lifecycle
management. Routes key pipelines by the `metadata.name` field from their specs and
return `PipeInfo` payloads that include the pipeline name, status, and full
configuration.

### Health

- `GET /healthz` - lightweight liveness probe returning `ok`.
- `GET /readyz` - readiness view returning `{"status":"ready","pipelines":[...]}`
  with the current pipeline states.

### Pipeline management

- `GET /pipelines` - list all pipelines with their current status and config.
- `POST /pipelines` - create a new pipeline from a full `PipelineSpec` document.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}` - get a single pipeline by name.
- `PATCH /pipelines/{name}` - apply a partial JSON patch to an existing pipeline
  (e.g., adjust batch or connection settings) and restart it with the merged spec.
- `DELETE /pipelines/{name}` - permanently delete a pipeline.
- `POST /pipelines/{name}/pause` - pause ingestion and processing for the pipeline.
- `POST /pipelines/{name}/resume` - resume a paused pipeline.
- `POST /pipelines/{name}/stop` - stop a running pipeline.

### Schema endpoints

- `GET /pipelines/{name}/schemas` - list DB schemas for the pipeline.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/schemas` - list inferred schemas (from sensing).
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/schemas/{table}` - get inferred schema details.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/schemas/{table}/json-schema` - export as JSON Schema.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/schemas/{table}/classifications` - get dynamic map classifications.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/drift` - get drift detection results.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/stats` - get schema sensing cache statistics.


## Configuration schema

Pipelines are defined as YAML documents that map directly to the internal `PipelineSpec` type. 
Environment variables are expanded before parsing, so secrets and URLs can be injected at runtime.

<table>
<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="top">

### Full Example

```yaml
metadata:
  name: orders-mysql-to-kafka
  tenant: acme

spec:
  sharding:
    mode: hash
    count: 4
    key: customer_id

  source:
    type: mysql
    config:
      id: orders-mysql
      dsn: ${MYSQL_DSN}
      tables:
        - shop.orders

  processors:
    - type: javascript
      id: my-custom-transform
      inline: |
        function processBatch(events) {
          return events;
        }
      limits:
        cpu_ms: 50
        mem_mb: 128
        timeout_ms: 500

  sinks:
    - type: kafka
      config:
        id: orders-kafka
        brokers: ${KAFKA_BROKERS}
        topic: orders
        envelope:
          type: debezium
        encoding: json
        required: true
        exactly_once: false
    - type: redis
      config:
        id: orders-redis
        uri: ${REDIS_URI}
        stream: orders
        envelope:
          type: native
        encoding: json
  
  batch:
    max_events: 500
    max_bytes: 1048576
    max_ms: 1000
    respect_source_tx: true

  commit_policy:
    mode: quorum
    quorum: 2

  schema_sensing:
    enabled: true
    deep_inspect:
      enabled: true
      max_depth: 3
    sampling:
      warmup_events: 50
      sample_rate: 5
    high_cardinality:
      enabled: true
      min_events: 100
```

</td>
<td width="50%" valign="top">

### Key fields

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| **`metadata`** | |
| `name` | Pipeline identifier (used in API routes and metrics) |
| `tenant` | Business-oriented tenant label |
| **`spec.source`** | Database source - [MySQL](docs/src/sources/mysql.md), [PostgreSQL](docs/src/sources/postgres.md), etc. |
| `type` | `mysql`, `postgres`, etc. |
| `config.id` | Unique identifier for checkpoints |
| `config.dsn` | Connection string (supports `${ENV_VAR}`) |
| `config.tables` | Table patterns to capture |
| **`spec.processors`** | Optional transforms - see [Processors](docs/src/configuration.md#processors) |
| `type` | `javascript` |
| `inline` | JavaScript code for batch processing |
| `limits` | CPU, memory, and timeout limits |
| **`spec.sinks`** | One or more sinks - see [Sinks](docs/src/sinks/README.md) |
| `type` | `kafka`, `redis`, or `nats` |
| `config.envelope` | Output format: `native`, `debezium`, or `cloudevents` - see [Envelopes](docs/src/envelopes.md) |
| `config.encoding` | Wire encoding: `json` (default) |
| `config.required` | Whether sink must ack for checkpoint (`true` default) |
| **`spec.batch`** | Commit unit thresholds - see [Batching](docs/src/configuration.md#batching) |
| `max_events` | Flush after N events (default: 500) |
| `max_bytes` | Flush after size limit (default: 1MB) |
| `max_ms` | Flush after time (default: 1000ms) |
| `respect_source_tx` | Keep source transactions intact (`true` default) |
| **`spec.commit_policy`** | Checkpoint gating - see [Commit policy](docs/src/configuration.md#commit-policy) |
| `mode` | `all`, `required` (default), or `quorum` |
| `quorum` | Number of sinks for quorum mode |
| **`spec.schema_sensing`** | Runtime schema inference - see [Schema sensing](docs/src/schemasensing.md) |
| `enabled` | Enable schema sensing (`false` default) |
| `deep_inspect` | Nested JSON inspection settings |
| `sampling` | Sampling rate and warmup config |
| `high_cardinality` | Dynamic key detection settings |

📘 Full reference: [Configuration docs](docs/src/configuration.md)

View actual examples: [Example Configurations](docs/src/examples/README.md)

</td>
</tr>
</table>

## Roadmap

- [ ] Outbox pattern support
- [ ] Persistent schema registry (SQLite, then PostgreSQL)
- [ ] Protobuf encoding
- [ ] PostgreSQL/S3 checkpoint backends for HA
- [ ] MongoDB source
- [ ] ClickHouse sink  
- [ ] Event store for time-based replay
- [ ] Distributed coordination for HA


## License

Licensed under either of

- **MIT License** (see [`LICENSE-MIT`](./LICENSE-MIT))
- **Apache License, Version 2.0** (see [`LICENSE-APACHE`](./LICENSE-APACHE))

at your option.

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted
for inclusion in this project by you shall be dual licensed as above, without
additional terms or conditions.

Commit message:

updated docs for routing and smaller corrections

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/deltaforge-blc.png" width="150" alt="DeltaForge">
</p>
<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/vnvo/deltaforge/actions/workflows/ci.yml">
    <img src="https://github.com/vnvo/deltaforge/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg" alt="CI">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/vnvo/deltaforge/releases">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/vnvo/deltaforge" alt="Release">
  </a>
  <a href="https://vnvo.github.io/deltaforge">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-online-blue.svg" alt="Docs">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/vnvo/deltaforge/pkgs/container/deltaforge">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/ghcr.io-deltaforge-blue?logo=docker" alt="GHCR">
  </a>
  <a href="https://hub.docker.com/r/vnvohub/deltaforge">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/vnvohub/deltaforge?logo=docker" alt="Docker Pulls">
  </a>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/arch-amd64%20%7C%20arm64-green" alt="Arch">
  <a href="https://coveralls.io/github/vnvo/deltaforge?branch=main">
    <img src="https://coveralls.io/repos/github/vnvo/deltaforge/badge.svg?branch=main" alt="Coverage Status">
  </a>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/rustc-1.89+-orange.svg" alt="MSRV">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT%20OR%20Apache--2.0-blue.svg" alt="License">
</p>

> A versatile, high-performance Change Data Capture (CDC) engine built in Rust.

> ⚠️ **Status:** Active development. APIs, configuration, and semantics may change.

DeltaForge streams database changes into downstream systems like Kafka, Redis, and NATS - giving you full control over routing, transformation, and delivery. Built-in schema discovery automatically infers and tracks the shape of your data as it flows through, including deep inspection of nested JSON structures.

> DeltaForge is _not_ a DAG based stream processor. It is a focused CDC engine meant to replace tools like Debezium when you need a lighter, cloud-native, and more customizable runtime.

## Quick Start

Get DeltaForge running in under 3 minutes:

<table>
<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="top">

### Minimal Pipeline Config
```yaml
# pipeline.yaml
apiVersion: deltaforge/v1
kind: Pipeline
metadata:
  name: my-first-pipeline
  tenant: demo

spec:
  source:
    type: mysql
    config:
      id: mysql-src
      dsn: ${MYSQL_DSN}
      tables: [mydb.users]

  processors: []

  sinks:
    - type: kafka
      config:
        id: kafka-sink
        brokers: ${KAFKA_BROKERS}
        topic: users.cdc
```

</td>
<td width="50%" valign="top">

### Run it with Docker
```bash
docker run --rm \
  -e MYSQL_DSN="mysql://user:pass@host:3306/mydb" \
  -e KAFKA_BROKERS="kafka:9092" \
  -v $(pwd)/pipeline.yaml:/etc/deltaforge/pipeline.yaml:ro \
  ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest \
  --config /etc/deltaforge/pipeline.yaml
```

That's it! DeltaForge streams changes from `mydb.users` to Kafka.

**Want Debezium-compatible output?**
```yaml
sinks:
  - type: kafka
    config:
      id: kafka-sink
      brokers: ${KAFKA_BROKERS}
      topic: users.cdc
      envelope:
        type: debezium
```

Output: `{"schema":null,"payload":{...}}`

📘 [Full docs](https://vnvo.github.io/deltaforge) · [Configuration reference](#configuration-schema)

</td>
</tr>
</table>

## The Tech

<table>
  <tr>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Built with</b></td>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Sources</b></td>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Processors</b></td>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Sinks</b></td>
    <td align="center" width="140"><b>Output Formats</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/rust/rust-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="Rust">
      <br><sub>Rust</sub>
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/mysql/mysql-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="MySQL">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/postgresql/postgresql-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="PostgreSQL">
      <br><sub>MySQL · PostgreSQL</sub>
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/javascript/javascript-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="JavaScript">
      <br><sub>JavaScript</sub>
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/apachekafka/apachekafka-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="Kafka">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/redis/redis-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="Redis">
      <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/devicons/devicon/icons/nats/nats-original.svg" width="40" height="40" alt="NATS">
      <br><sub>Kafka · Redis · NATS</sub>
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Native-red?style=flat-square" alt="Native">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Debezium-green?style=flat-square" alt="Debezium">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/CloudEvents-blue?style=flat-square" alt="CloudEvents">
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Features

- **Sources**
  - MySQL binlog CDC with GTID support
  - PostgreSQL logical replication via pgoutput
  - Turso/libSQL CDC (experimental, behind `turso` feature flag)

- **Schema Registry**
  - Source-owned schema types (source native semantics)
  - Schema change detection and versioning
  - SHA-256 fingerprinting for stable change detection

- **Schema Sensing**
  - Automatic schema inference from JSON event payloads
  - Deep inspection for nested JSON structures
  - High-cardinality key detection (session IDs, trace IDs, dynamic maps)
  - Configurable sampling with warmup and cache optimization
  - Drift detection comparing DB schema vs observed data
  - JSON Schema export for downstream consumers

- **Checkpoints**
  - Pluggable backends (File, SQLite with versioning, in-memory)
  - Configurable commit policies (all, required, quorum)
  - Transaction boundary preservation (best effort)

- **Processors**
  - JavaScript processors using `deno_core`:
    - Run user defined functions (UDFs) in JS to transform batches of events

- **Sinks**
  - Kafka producer sink (via `rdkafka`)
  - Redis stream sink
  - NATS JetStream sink (via `async_nats`)
  - Configurable envelope formats: Native, Debezium, CloudEvents
  - JSON wire encoding (Avro planned and more to come)

### Event Output Formats

DeltaForge supports multiple envelope formats for ecosystem compatibility:

| Format | Output | Use Case |
|--------|--------|----------|
| `native` | `{"op":"c","after":{...},"source":{...}}` | Lowest overhead, DeltaForge consumers |
| `debezium` | `{"schema":null,"payload":{...}}` | Drop-in Debezium replacement |
| `cloudevents` | `{"specversion":"1.0","type":"...","data":{...}}` | CNCF-standard, event-driven systems |

🔄 **Debezium Compatibility**: DeltaForge uses Debezium's **schemaless mode** (`schema: null`), which matches Debezium's `JsonConverter` with `schemas.enable=false` - the recommended configuration for most Kafka deployments. This provides wire compatibility with existing Debezium consumers without the overhead of inline schemas (~500+ bytes per message).

> 💡 **Migrating from Debezium?** If your consumers already use `schemas.enable=false`, configure `envelope: { type: debezium }` on your sinks for drop-in compatibility. For consumers expecting inline schemas, you'll need Schema Registry integration (Avro encoding - planned).

See [Envelope Formats](docs/src/envelopes.md) for detailed examples and wire format specifications.

## Documentation

- 📘 Online docs: <https://vnvo.github.io/deltaforge>
- 🛠 Local: `mdbook serve docs` (browse at <http://localhost:3000>)

## Local development helper

Use the bundled `dev.sh` CLI to spin up the dependency stack and run common workflows consistently:

```bash
./dev.sh up     # start Postgres, MySQL, Kafka, Redis, NATS from docker-compose.dev.yml
./dev.sh ps     # view container status
./dev.sh check  # fmt --check + clippy + tests (matches CI)
```

See the [Development guide](docs/src/development.md) for the full layout and additional info.

## Container image

Pre-built multi-arch images (amd64/arm64) are available:
```bash
# From GitHub Container Registry
docker pull ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest

# From Docker Hub
docker pull vnvohub/deltaforge:latest

# Debug variant (includes shell)
docker pull ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest-debug
```

Or build locally:
```bash
docker build -t deltaforge:local .
```

Run it by mounting your pipeline specs (environment variables are expanded inside the YAML) and exposing the API and metrics ports:

```bash
docker run --rm \
  -p 8080:8080 -p 9000:9000 \
  -v $(pwd)/examples/dev.yaml:/etc/deltaforge/pipelines.yaml:ro \
  -v deltaforge-checkpoints:/app/data \
  deltaforge:local \
  --config /etc/deltaforge/pipelines.yaml
```

or with env variables to be expanded inside the provided config:
```bash
# pull the container
docker pull ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest

# run it
docker run --rm \
  -p 8080:8080 -p 9000:9000 \
  -e MYSQL_DSN="mysql://user:pass@host:3306/db" \
  -e KAFKA_BROKERS="kafka:9092" \
  -v $(pwd)/pipeline.yaml:/etc/deltaforge/pipeline.yaml:ro \
  -v deltaforge-checkpoints:/app/data \
  ghcr.io/vnvo/deltaforge:latest \
  --config /etc/deltaforge/pipeline.yaml
```

The container runs as a non-root user, writes checkpoints to `/app/data/df_checkpoints.json`, and listens on `0.0.0.0:8080` for the control plane API with metrics served on `:9000`.


## Architecture Highlights

### At-least-once and Checkpoint Timing Guarantees

DeltaForge guarantees at-least-once delivery through careful checkpoint ordering:

```
Source → Processor → Sink (deliver) → Checkpoint (save)
                           │
                    Sink acknowledges
                    successful delivery
                           │
                    THEN checkpoint saved
```

Checkpoints are never saved before events are delivered. A crash between delivery and checkpoint causes replay (duplicates possible), but never loss.

### Schema-Checkpoint Correlation

The schema registry tracks schema versions with sequence numbers and optional checkpoint correlation. During replay, events are interpreted with the schema that was active when they were produced - even if the table structure has since changed.

### Source-Owned Schemas

Unlike tools that normalize all databases to a universal type system, DeltaForge lets each source define its own schema semantics. MySQL schemas capture MySQL types (`bigint(20) unsigned`, `json`), PostgreSQL schemas preserve arrays and custom types. No lossy normalization, no universal type maintenance burden.


## API

The REST API exposes JSON endpoints for liveness, readiness, and pipeline lifecycle
management. Routes key pipelines by the `metadata.name` field from their specs and
return `PipeInfo` payloads that include the pipeline name, status, and full
configuration.

### Health

- `GET /healthz` - lightweight liveness probe returning `ok`.
- `GET /readyz` - readiness view returning `{"status":"ready","pipelines":[...]}`
  with the current pipeline states.

### Pipeline management

- `GET /pipelines` - list all pipelines with their current status and config.
- `POST /pipelines` - create a new pipeline from a full `PipelineSpec` document.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}` - get a single pipeline by name.
- `PATCH /pipelines/{name}` - apply a partial JSON patch to an existing pipeline
  (e.g., adjust batch or connection settings) and restart it with the merged spec.
- `DELETE /pipelines/{name}` - permanently delete a pipeline.
- `POST /pipelines/{name}/pause` - pause ingestion and processing for the pipeline.
- `POST /pipelines/{name}/resume` - resume a paused pipeline.
- `POST /pipelines/{name}/stop` - stop a running pipeline.

### Schema endpoints

- `GET /pipelines/{name}/schemas` - list DB schemas for the pipeline.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/schemas` - list inferred schemas (from sensing).
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/schemas/{table}` - get inferred schema details.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/schemas/{table}/json-schema` - export as JSON Schema.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/schemas/{table}/classifications` - get dynamic map classifications.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/drift` - get drift detection results.
- `GET /pipelines/{name}/sensing/stats` - get schema sensing cache statistics.


## Configuration schema

Pipelines are defined as YAML documents that map directly to the internal `PipelineSpec` type. 
Environment variables are expanded before parsing, so secrets and URLs can be injected at runtime.

<table>
<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="top">

### Full Example

```yaml
metadata:
  name: orders-mysql-to-kafka
  tenant: acme

spec:
  sharding:
    mode: hash
    count: 4
    key: customer_id

  source:
    type: mysql
    config:
      id: orders-mysql
      dsn: ${MYSQL_DSN}
      tables:
        - shop.orders

  processors:
    - type: javascript
      id: my-custom-transform
      inline: |
        function processBatch(events) {
          return events;
        }
      limits:
        cpu_ms: 50
        mem_mb: 128
        timeout_ms: 500

  sinks:
    - type: kafka
      config:
        id: orders-kafka
        brokers: ${KAFKA_BROKERS}
        topic: orders
        envelope:
          type: debezium
        encoding: json
        required: true
        exactly_once: false
    - type: redis
      config:
        id: orders-redis
        uri: ${REDIS_URI}
        stream: orders
        envelope:
          type: native
        encoding: json
  
  batch:
    max_events: 500
    max_bytes: 1048576
    max_ms: 1000
    respect_source_tx: true

  commit_policy:
    mode: quorum
    quorum: 2

  schema_sensing:
    enabled: true
    deep_inspect:
      enabled: true
      max_depth: 3
    sampling:
      warmup_events: 50
      sample_rate: 5
    high_cardinality:
      enabled: true
      min_events: 100
```

</td>
<td width="50%" valign="top">

### Key fields

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| **`metadata`** | |
| `name` | Pipeline identifier (used in API routes and metrics) |
| `tenant` | Business-oriented tenant label |
| **`spec.source`** | Database source - [MySQL](docs/src/sources/mysql.md), [PostgreSQL](docs/src/sources/postgres.md), etc. |
| `type` | `mysql`, `postgres`, etc. |
| `config.id` | Unique identifier for checkpoints |
| `config.dsn` | Connection string (supports `${ENV_VAR}`) |
| `config.tables` | Table patterns to capture |
| **`spec.processors`** | Optional transforms - see [Processors](docs/src/configuration.md#processors) |
| `type` | `javascript` |
| `inline` | JavaScript code for batch processing |
| `limits` | CPU, memory, and timeout limits |
| **`spec.sinks`** | One or more sinks - see [Sinks](docs/src/sinks/README.md) |
| `type` | `kafka`, `redis`, or `nats` |
| `config.envelope` | Output format: `native`, `debezium`, or `cloudevents` - see [Envelopes](docs/src/envelopes.md) |
| `config.encoding` | Wire encoding: `json` (default) |
| `config.required` | Whether sink must ack for checkpoint (`true` default) |
| **`spec.batch`** | Commit unit thresholds - see [Batching](docs/src/configuration.md#batching) |
| `max_events` | Flush after N events (default: 500) |
| `max_bytes` | Flush after size limit (default: 1MB) |
| `max_ms` | Flush after time (default: 1000ms) |
| `respect_source_tx` | Keep source transactions intact (`true` default) |
| **`spec.commit_policy`** | Checkpoint gating - see [Commit policy](docs/src/configuration.md#commit-policy) |
| `mode` | `all`, `required` (default), or `quorum` |
| `quorum` | Number of sinks for quorum mode |
| **`spec.schema_sensing`** | Runtime schema inference - see [Schema sensing](docs/src/schemasensing.md) |
| `enabled` | Enable schema sensing (`false` default) |
| `deep_inspect` | Nested JSON inspection settings |
| `sampling` | Sampling rate and warmup config |
| `high_cardinality` | Dynamic key detection settings |

📘 Full reference: [Configuration docs](docs/src/configuration.md)

View actual examples: [Example Configurations](docs/src/examples/README.md)

</td>
</tr>
</table>

## Roadmap

- [ ] Outbox pattern support
- [ ] Persistent schema registry (SQLite, then PostgreSQL)
- [ ] Protobuf encoding
- [ ] PostgreSQL/S3 checkpoint backends for HA
- [ ] MongoDB source
- [ ] ClickHouse sink  
- [ ] Event store for time-based replay
- [ ] Distributed coordination for HA


## License

Licensed under either of

- **MIT License** (see [`LICENSE-MIT`](./LICENSE-MIT))
- **Apache License, Version 2.0** (see [`LICENSE-APACHE`](./LICENSE-APACHE))

at your option.

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted
for inclusion in this project by you shall be dual licensed as above, without
additional terms or conditions.
